Hey, Conexus.
It's VJ Krishnan.
I'm the lead pastor at The Well and a really good friend of your pastor, Jeff Brody's, and have come to love your church over many years as we are kind of doing what God has called us to do.
In our respective cities were a church in three locations in the greater Toronto area and so good to be with you in this series that we have called the prayer lab This is week number two and I thought as we start today.
I want to give you just a second to Scroll through six images that I'm going to put on the screen one at a time and I'm not going to say they just want you to just absorb them Just kind of feel what's going on in each of the pictures.
So have a look
I think each of these pictures in some way depict people who are relating to one another but who are not close.
See, you have these, you know, the couples who's sort of on a first date maybe and there's a little bit of awkwardness in that.
There's the man in the confessional who's talking to somebody who's physically close to him but maybe it's like, I don't even know this person, I'm gonna bear my soul to them.
There's the couple who's not on a first date.
Maybe it looks like they've been together for a while, but they're distracted or annoyed or drifted with each other.
Then there's the relationship between the person who got pulled over by the cop.
It's like, we don't even want to be having this conversation.
The only reason we are is because one of us is in trouble.
Then there's the people bargaining in the market.
You know, they're close, but each one is trying to give as little as possible to the other in a negotiation.
And then the last person actually who's in a room full of people, but in a sense is on their own.
As I thought about each of these images in some ways, I think they describe how we at times may feel in our relationship with God, right?
Like,
the couple on a date which is kind of still getting to know each other.
The person in the confessional going, I have to bear my soul to you, God, and I don't even know you.
Or the couple that's drifted over time and we should be closer than we are and maybe I'm distracted or maybe I think God's distracted or annoyed with me because I'm distracted.
Or like God the cop, I got to talk to this person who's probably going to tell me that I've done something wrong or I'm in trouble.
Or maybe that like prayer or closest to God is like a negotiation where I'm trying to get from God what I need and he's trying to give as little as possible or have to say it or haggle in the right way.
Or maybe like I'm going through something, but I guess I'm on my own for this.
I think that can describe sometimes how we feel in our prayer lives with God, whether prayer is something new or something you've had a million false starts on, or maybe you've prayed for a while and stopped and up and down in your prayer journey.
And yet, prayer is indispensable in our relationship with God.
It is the way we're actually meant to feel.
close to him.
It is the basis of communication with him.
And so we are taking these three weeks to try some stuff out in the lab.
Like I said to you last week, if I put the word lab after the word prayer, maybe that makes us feel a little bit less anxious.
It's like, Oh yeah, I need to figure this out.
I need to learn and grow and try and fail.
And that's okay.
But how do I grow in this language of communication with a God that I am meant to be close to?
For me, those images as they were scrolling, I think the one I relate to the most sometimes is that feeling of, oh, we should be closer than we are.
that maybe I'm often distracted in life or in prayer and that God is kind of disappointed or annoyed with me.
I know in my head maybe he isn't, but I sometimes feel like that.
And so what does it mean for us to actually grow in our relationship with God?
And if that's describing you in some way where you don't feel as close to him as you could be or should be or just distant or it's like a first date dynamic or, oh no, I'm in trouble or I guess I'm on my own.
In this lab series, I'm sharing with you things that have been game changers for me in helping me in my prayer life, in feeling closer to God.
And this prayer lab idea is just like, hey, we need a place to learn and grow in our prayer lives.
And so for the rest of the time, today I want to share with you what has been a game changing practice for me in prayer.
And to do that, I want to begin by reading a prayer that somebody actually wrote that's captured for us in the prayer book of the Bible.
The Bible's not a book.
It's actually a library of 66 books.
And one of those books is called the Book of Psalms, which is actually a book of prayers that various people wrote and that we have preserved for us over many, many, many, many years, centuries.
And I want to read for you a prayer that is very different than those pictures I described.
But it actually has a kind of feeling of a closeness to God.
And I want to read it for you.
And in a sense, it's full of images.
It's a longer section of scripture.
And so it would be helpful for you to kind of just try to stay with me on this.
But imagine it as mental pictures, those ones you saw with your eyes.
I want you to, in a sense, hear these pictures.
as this person describing their relationship with God in a very different way.
And so I'm reading from Psalm 139 in the new living translation.
Oh Lord, you have examined my heart and know everything about me.
You know, when I sit down or stand up, you know, my thoughts, even when I'm far away, you see me when I travel and when I rest at home.
You know everything I do.
You know what I'm going to say even before I say it, Lord?
You go before me and follow me.
You place your hand of blessing on my head.
Such knowledge is too wonderful for me, too great for me to understand.
I can never escape from your spirit.
I can never get away from your presence.
If I go up to heaven, you are there.
If I get onto the grave, you are there.
If I ride the wings of the morning, if I dwell on the farthest oceans, even there your hand will guide me and your strength will support me.
I could ask the darkness to hide me and the light around me to become night, but even in darkness I cannot hide from you.
To you the night shines as bright as day.
Darkness and light are the same to you.
You made all the delicate inner parts of my body and knit me together in my mother's womb.
Thank you for making me so wonderfully complex.
Your workmanship is marvelous.
How well I know it.
You watched me as I was being formed in utter seclusion, as I was woven together in the dark of the womb.
You saw me before I was born.
Every day of my life was recorded in your book.
Every moment was laid out before a single day had passed.
How precious are your thoughts about me, O God.
They cannot be numbered.
I can't even count them.
They outnumber the grains of sand.
And when I wake up, you're still with me.
Oh God, if only you would destroy the wicked.
Get out of my life, you murderers.
They blaspheme you.
Your enemies misuse your name.
Oh Lord, shouldn't I hate those who hate you?
Shouldn't I despise those who oppose you?
Yes, I hate them with total hatred for your enemies are my enemies.
Search me, oh God.
Test me and know my anxious thoughts.
Point out anything in me that offends you.
Like maybe that angry rant I just went on and lead me along the path everlasting.
This prayer is describing, I think, a God who is right there.
A God who is incredibly close.
In a way, actually, as you read it, I don't know if you noticed this, it's like he's talking this writer about God present in all the time zones of his life, in the past, in the present, and in the future.
He begins by saying, God, you were there the whole time.
In my past, look what he says in verse 13, you made me, like from the beginning, verse 15, you've known me my whole life.
And verse 17, I have been on your mind constantly.
He said, how precious are your thoughts about me?
They must outnumber the grains of sand.
I don't know if this is narcissism or just like a sense of like, God, I know you think about me.
I know you've seen me my whole life.
He's looking back in his past in a sense and realizing God, you were there the whole time.
Uh, you know, you've been there in a sense from the beginning, from the time I was made, but before I was even formed, you knew me right from day one in my life.
You have been there the whole time.
God in his past.
But then he's like saying, yeah, but now you're with me now everywhere I go in the present.
Look what he says in verse 18 and verse 3.
He says, I remember our kids when they were little and like sometimes in the middle of the night they would come and like my one child would just stand next to our bed and I would wake up and he'd be standing there.
It's like the shining or some horror movies freak me out.
It's not like that where you like you wake up and God's like there.
It's like he says, I wake up when I wake up, you're there.
It's like God saying, let's go.
I'm here.
Let's do this day together.
I'm with you from the moment you wake up.
There's not a moment you're alone, right?
You're with me first thing in the morning and until the end of the day.
Verse one, you know everything about me.
You're so aware of my everyday life.
When I go, when I return, where I've been in verse five, you're all around me.
And I really need you to be like where I need you to be.
You are with me in the present in every part of my life in verse seven to 11.
He's like, even when I wish you'd leave me alone or I feel too ashamed to be in your presence.
Like he says, where could I go?
Right?
If I go to the far side of the sea or I rise in the wings of the dawn, even there, you know, like no matter where I go, sometimes even when I don't want you to be,
Or when I want the darkness to become night around me, he's like saying, when I want to hide, like sometimes we want to hide from God because we feel ashamed or we feel embarrassed or we're not sure what he thinks.
Even there, he's like, you won't let me hide from you.
You are always with me, not just in my past from the beginning, but you know everything about me and you're with me in every part of my life and my day, even when I wish you weren't, you're there.
I can't get away from you.
And he says, you'll lead me forward.
in the future.
Verse 24, he says, lead me in the way everlasting or some translation saying everlasting life.
He's not talking about heaven.
He's saying the way, in other words, the way everlasting.
In other words, life to the full.
God, lead me in the best way.
You've known me my whole life.
You've been there from the beginning.
Even before I was formed in my mother's womb, you've walked with me every part of my life.
You're with me right now.
Every day when I wake up, you're there ready to go right to the end of the day.
You know my thoughts and everything about me and
you're going to lead me in the future.
You're going to be there because I know you've been there in the past and I know you're here in the present.
You're going to lead me in the future.
Lead me in the way everlasting.
It's like saying God, don't stop leading me in what's best, the best way life to the full.
Test me and know my anxious thoughts.
God, I feel anxious.
Can you help me with my anxiety?
Teach me how to think and then
Teach me how to live.
You know, you see some of the ways that I have are not good.
They're offensive or they're wrong.
So don't just teach me how to think.
Teach me how to live.
Lead me well.
I want to make good decisions.
I want to make better decisions than I made in the past.
God, remember that thing I did back then?
Please, can you lead me in a better way now?
What a beautiful way to be able to pray.
This person's describing his experience of God in the past.
and in the present and in the future.
What's interesting is this wasn't just a private prayer of, it says of a psalm of David and some of your translations you'll read for the choir director.
So this guy David is writing, it was King David, writing about his experience with God.
always with him.
And the thing is, we know, that's not always everyone's experience, that we're always feeling, God, with me in my past, with him in my future, with me in my present and in my future, we know David actually didn't always feel like that.
He might be like, oh, it sounds nice for you.
Perfect prayer.
It's like, no, no, there are times if you read it in the other parts of the prayer, but he's like, God, where are you?
Right?
You seem so far away.
You've abandoned me.
We might say, David, didn't you remember you wrote, God's always with you.
He's like, yeah, I don't believe that anymore.
Right?
That happens sometimes.
We're like, we feel like God's far away, but there are times.
And clearly in his life, he was like, no, I feel you're so close.
I can look back and I see you've been involved in my life all the way along.
I can feel your presence right now.
And therefore I know you're going to be with me as you lead me.
And he gave this to his choir director to teach it to the people so the people would be able to sing this and say this as their prayer.
So in a sense, this is given to us as well.
This is a prayer we can pray, a prayer that talks about God in all the time zones.
of our life.
We look back, we look at the present, we look future.
You might be saying, well, that would be nice.
Like, how does that happen?
How do we actually have that experience?
Not just read this prayer, but go, oh yeah, I can say that, that I feel a closeness to God to me in all the time zones of my life.
The answer is, ready?
Prayer.
Be like, that's not an answer.
It's like a, you know, self of a circular argument.
It's like, no, actually it's certain types
of prayer.
And I want to actually teach you a prayer that can help you become more aware of God in all the time zones of your life.
It's actually a prayer that for the longest time I never even knew existed.
It was not a prayer that I learned growing up.
I sort of grew up in a church and in a family of faith or whatever, but I never knew this prayer.
I don't think my parents knew this prayer growing up.
They didn't teach it in our church.
I learned it later in life, but it really actually helped me locate God in the past and the present in the future.
It's called the prayer of examine, the prayer of examine.
Now, maybe you've heard this before, you've never heard it at all.
What's really interesting about this prayer, and we're not going to teach you how to pray it in a moment.
Oftentimes prayer is like prayer before something happens.
Right?
Like God, I've got this exam coming up or I've got a medical appointment or my parent has a medical appointment or I've got a job interview or I'm trying to make this team.
So I'm praying before something happens.
We do that.
We pray for things that are going to happen when we're praying for God to do something in intervene or whatever.
Sometimes we pray while something's happening.
Oh God, we just got in a car accident.
Oh God, I need your help.
Oh God, I just forgot this bad news.
You're praying right now in the moment.
But we rarely pray after something happens.
Right?
I don't know about you, but like after something happens, I just move on to the next thing.
What's the next thing I need to, what's the next thing I'm doing?
Or I'm sometimes to be scattered in my life, just moving from one thing to the next, or I'm just praying about what's next.
I don't often pray after the fact, but this is a prayer after the fact.
In a sense, it's helping us.
It's a prayer of reflection that looks back, that looks back on our day and on our past on
what happened in that day, what happened in that interaction, what happened in that conversation, what happened in that situation or that circumstance.
It's a prayer after the fact that looks back.
You know, so often in life,
We are rushing from one thing to the next.
Regardless of your personality, if you live in the world that we live in, life is busy.
There's always something out.
You go to my Google counter, it looks like a unicorn vomited on it.
There's so many things to do.
And so our lives are built around a rhythm and a routine that sometimes makes prayer in general difficult, but certainly makes reflection almost completely absent from our lives.
We don't often look back.
And people say, the truth is you don't learn from experience.
You don't learn from going through something.
you learn from reflecting on what you went through.
Just going through something doesn't teach you, otherwise we would never make the same mistake twice, and yet we often do.
It's reflecting back on what happened.
And this, we actually need reflective prayer, and the prayer of examine is a prayer that looks back.
It teaches us to look back in that conversation, in that situation, to find God.
The prayer was actually developed by a man called Ignatius, or Saint Ignatius of Loyola.
And he termed this prayer the daily examine, the daily pilgrimage to God.
I love that.
A daily pilgrimage to God.
A pilgrimage, people say, oh, life's a journey, not a destination, but a pilgrimage is a journey with a specific destination.
I'm going somewhere.
The daily pilgrimage is not to go find God's because God is up in heaven somewhere or lost.
It's for us to return to God who's always there.
We drift.
We lose sight.
We walk away.
The exam is the daily pilgrimage to come back to God, to look back.
And here's what happens.
It's this daily exercise of looking back over the last 24 hours of my day.
And here's what I've noticed happens.
When I look back, I have and I rethink and relive in a sense the last 24 hours and I'm asking God, where were you in those 24 hours?
I'm becoming more aware
of God's presence in my past.
I'm able to say like kind of David is, oh, you were there the whole time.
I was unaware, but as I look back now, I see that you were there.
And as I look back and become more aware of God's presence in my past, I become more aware over time.
I'm like, wait, you were there in that conversation.
You're probably there in this conversation.
You were there in that situation.
You're probably there in this conversation, in this situation.
You were there in that emotion, that anger, that sadness, that fear.
You're probably here right now when I'm feeling angry or sad or afraid.
As I look back and realize he was there the whole time, I become more aware that he's here with me right now.
And when that happens, when I can see God in my past, in that time zone, in this time zone, the present one, I can begin to have faithfulness and understand, oh, you're going to be with me where I am.
And so we're going to do this now for a moment.
And I'm actually going to walk you through a prayer of examine.
And I'm going to use an app that's called reimagining the examine.
It's an app that I use that has a whole bunch of different types of examined prayers.
And I'm going to walk you through this.
And then the next step is really going to give you just a QR code that you can download this app and use it.
But I first want to walk through it with you until you feel it.
This is a guided prayer.
Remember, this is a lab.
We're not just talking about it.
We're going to try it.
And again, for those of you that maybe run out of words or you don't know even where to start, this is a perfect way, a guided prayer and having an app that helps you do that.
Okay, so I'm gonna walk you through an examined prayer that is just about your relationship with God.
And there's a lot of freedom in this to just dialogue with God looking back and becoming more aware of his presence in your life.
And so it begins with just a short scripture.
Once, when Jesus was praying alone, with only the disciples near him, he asked them, who do the crowds say I am?
They answered, John the Baptist, but others say Elijah and still others that one of the ancient prophets has come back.
He said to them, but who do you say I am?
Peter answered, the Messiah of God.
Take a moment now and ask God to make His presence known to you in this moment.
I place my hands, my palms up in a gesture of receptivity.
I spend a few moments in gratitude.
thanking God for one or two of the blessings, big and small that I've received today.
And if you're doing this in the morning, and you're watching this morning or at church, you can just think about yesterday.
If it's at the end of the day, just think about the last day.
I thank God for one or two of the blessings, big and small that I've received.
Think about my relationship with God.
I talk to God in my mind or heart about how my relationship has been going lately.
Are we getting along well?
Do I feel close to or distant from God right now?
Have I spent quality time with God or have I been neglectful?
Do I sense that God is close to me when I call on him?
Or am I bored with him?
Let's take a moment and talk to him about how your relationship is going.
How do you feel?
What are you wondering?
When I look on the face of God, when I imagine his face, do I feel joy, gratitude, shame, or fear?
I ask God to show me how he sees our relationship.
Just wait to see what he says.
And now quietly and peacefully, I watch the video in my mind of how today has played out.
Maybe yesterday or just the last 12 hours.
I replay the scenes in my mind and as I watch each scene I ask, where was Christ in this moment?
How did Christ come to me in this moment?
Often there's one particular memory, one particular moment, one particular conversation or experience where you, as you look back now you realize, oh, it was that moment.
Jesus was right there.
Just ask yourself, where was Christ in those moments?
After looking over a few of the details of my day, I back up and I look at the big picture and I ask myself, given all that's happened today, who is Christ for me today?
Was he a teacher?
Was he a friend?
Was he a consoler?
Was he a coach?
A silent observer?
A spouse?
a Savior, a parent?
Who is Christ for me today?
I say to Christ,
Lord, today you were this for me.
Just fill in that blank.
Who was Jesus for you today?
Just a simple prayer after you reflected on who he was.
Now you're able to turn into a prayer, Christ.
Lord, today you were this for me.
Now I ask, Lord, if you were filling that blank, then who am I in relationship to you?
I might say, Lord, you were my teacher and I was your student.
Lord, you were my consoler and I was a broken hearted soul in need of your healing.
I speak to God a while about the way my relationship with him played out today.
Lord, you were this and I was this.
And now I look to tomorrow.
How do I want or need Christ to be present to me tomorrow?
Do I need Him to be my teacher, my friend, my savior, or something else?
I tell Christ what it is I want or need from His presence in my life as I move forward.
Jesus, tomorrow I really need you to be.
Fill in the blank.
closed by saying thank you.
In the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit.
Amen.
That is just one example of learning to pray to become more aware of the closeness of God in all of the time zones of our life.
And I'd love to share the reimagining the examine app with you.
You don't have to use this, but if you're like, yeah, this would help me.
I go through seasons of my life where I pray these kinds of prayers every day and then sometimes I don't for a few weeks, or sometimes I just do in a moment.
It was a little while ago last year when my son was having second reconstructive nose surgery.
It was sort of a major sports injury and we were in the waiting room and I was waiting for him while he was in surgery and I was feeling kind of anxious.
It was noise.
It was like it was not like a prayerful space or whatever.
Obviously it's busy.
But I just needed to focus and so I pulled out this app in six minutes.
It was all it was just to become more aware of Jesus presence to me.
And it was such a gift.
It was actually what I needed right in that moment.
And so you can use this on an
ad hoc basis or in the moment that you need it.
And the point is to become more aware of Jesus presence.
Cause what happens is, is I begin to reflect a little bit more and just look back and take stock of the day that was either in the morning for the day before or at the end of the day for the day that was.
And I begin to see, Oh God, you were there the whole time.
And if you were there then, you're probably there now or here now.
in this conversation, in this situation, in this emotion.
And as I see him there the whole time in my past, with me in my present, I can have confidence as I look ahead to the future that he will be with me there as well.
God, thank you that you are near, that you are close to us.
Help us become more aware of your presence in the past as we look back
And as we do and more and more, we see that you have been at work in so many different ways that then we can begin to spot you real time, become aware of you real time in the present, in this situation, in this conversation, in this emotion, in this crisis, and that we can grow in a confidence that whatever we face tomorrow in the year ahead or in the decade ahead that you will be close to us as well.
We thank you that this is who you are.
In Jesus' name we pray.
Amen.